TEXT TEST
This section tests the Text Capabilities of the printer driver.  It utilizes
the features of the ExtTextOut function associated with GDI and the printer
driver.  In testing the text capabilities of the driver, the font objects
which the driver supports is also tested.

TESTS
1) Text Clipping to a rectangle.
This tests the output of a string onto a clipping rectangle.



This section tests the output of text to the printer driver.  It utilizes the
features of the ExtTextOut function associated with Windows Software
Development Kit (SDK).  The components of the ExtTextOut function allow the
outputing of text in a defined rectangle.  This rectangle can be either
CLIPPED or OPAQUE.  If a rectangle is identified as CLIPPED, then text output
to the driver should be clipped to the rectangle (this is dependent on the
capabilities of the printer driver).  Not all printer drivers support vertical
text clipping.  The ExtTextOut function also allows for the spacing of
characters to be manipulated.

The structure for testing the drivers Text Out capabilities will concentrate on
outputing text to different locations of the rectangle.  If the rectangle is
defined as a CLIPPING rectangle, then the text should be clipped based on the
capabilities of the driver.  Text should show through OPAQUED rectangles.

TEST
The rectangle is centered horizontally on the printable page, and the height
of the rectangle is dependant on the FONT.  It is equal to the height of the
font.  The text string's alignment is at the TOP-LEFT of the character cells,
and is outputed at nine strategic locations:

VERIFY
    1. text fits in rectangle.
    2. top-half of the text is outside rectangle.
    3. bottom-half of text is outside rectangle.
    4. left-half of text is outside rectangle.
    5. left-half and top-half of text is outside rectangle.
    6. left-half and bottom-half of text is outside of rectangle.
    7. right-half of text is outside rectangle.
    8. right-half and top-half of text is outside rectangle.
    9. right-half and bottom-half of text is outside of rectangle.
